# Computational-Methods-for-Data-Analysis-Projects
A compendium of reports and algorithms created for the Computational Methods for Data Analysis class. 

[Filtering intestinal ultrasound data to isolate the location of a foreign body in vivo](HW1/AMATH482_HW1.pdf)
Modern medical imaging systems depend on the ability to extract information of interest, such as the size and location of a foreign body, from information collected incidentally, such as noise. Image post-processing algorithms are a flexible method for digital information extraction. Through this approach, a data set can be manipulated through a variety of filters and algorithms to effectively extract useful information. In this paper, I demonstrate the utility of a Gaussian filter applied to ultrasound data to isolate the location of a marble within the intestines of a dog.

[Utilizing Gábor transforms and spectrograms to perform time-frequency analysis](HW2/AMATH482_HW2.pdf)
Time-frequency analysis is essential for the characterization and modification of signals that vary in time; these techniques can even be applied to signals collected in the spatial domain. One key method by which frequency domain components are represented is through the use of spectrograms. When coupled with the Gábor transform, useful frequency and phase information can be determined from local frames of signal as those frames change over time. In this work, I demonstrate the utility of both the Gábor transform and spectrograms for the time-frequency analysis of three pieces of music performed with different instruments.

[Motion characterization of a spring-mass system with principal component analysis](HW3/AMATH482_HW3.pdf)
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a statistical technique by which variables that may or may not be correlated are transformed into principal components - a set of values of linearly independent variables. This technique is a vital tool in investigative data analysis because it identifies an uncorrelated orthogonal basis set of vectors across which the dataset has the greatest variance. By identifying these vectors, the dimensionality of the dataset can be reduced, thus revealing the most relevant information for the characteristic relationships between variables in the dataset. In this report, I utilize PCA to characterize the mechanical behavior of a spring-mass system through video recordings.

[Using PCA and LDA for music classification](HW4/AMATH482_HW4.pdf)
Data analysis often entails the identification of patterns across a dataset. One method by which data can be analyzed is by classifying data points into unique groups. Using principal component analysis (PCA) and linear discriminate analysis (LDA), an algorithm can be developed to identify unique features of known classes within a given training dataset. This trained algorithm can then be applied to a dataset with unknown classification to sort that data by class. In this paper, I detail the method for the creation of such an algorithm for music classification.

[Artificial Neural Networks for Classifying Fashion MNIST](HW5/AMATH482_HW5.pdf)
Artificial neural networks have wide utility in data analysis applications because of their ability to continually and flexibly optimize network parameters. In this paper, I examine the effectiveness of two types of neural network architectures for image classification. By training, validating, and then testing a fully-connected neural network and a convolutional neural network, I am able to determine which architecture has the most utility when classifying the images of the Fashion Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology (MNIST).  
